via IM [12]. Overall, study results for these computer-based
interruptibility indicators suggest that they can help increase
awareness on the disruptiveness of interruptions, which could
be a first good step as stated by Beyea[6]. However, the results
also suggest that these approaches do not reduce in-person
interruption costs, which is what the FlowLight is addressing.
Since in-person interruptions are one of the top causes for
interruptions in the workplace and their immediate nature
makes them particularly disruptive [29], researchers found
that knowledge workers use physical indicators, such as headphones
or office doors to indicate interruptibility and reduce
interruptions and distraction [29].
Only few researchers examined indicators that are not just visible
on a knowledge worker’s computer monitor. InterruptMe
projects availability cues of possible contacts onto a wall at
the time when the interrupter is about to initiate a communication
[15, 14]. The MoodLight uses an ambient display
connected to an electro-dermal activity (EDA) monitor that
indicates the excitement level of one or two individuals [27].
Bjelica et al. developed an automatic interruptibility indicator
that displays the status through ambient lighting effects and
found in a small and short study that the indicator reduced the
number of interruptions [7]. The FlowLight presented in this
paper uses a physical traffic-light like LED placed at the desk
of each person, such that the person’s interruptibility status
can be seen by anyone approaching. Thereby, our approach
is more direct and prominent than subtle ambient lighting
and different to previous research, our large-scale field study
examines the long-term effects of such physical indicators.
APPROACH AND IMPLEMENTATION
The FlowLight consists of a computer application to automatically
determine a user’s interruptibility state and a physical
LED light to indicate this state to co-workers. The FlowLight
was developed iteratively over more than a year and improved
continuously based on feedback from a small developer team
that we used for testing, and later on, also based on feedback
from study participants.
Physical LED Light. FlowLight uses a physical traffic-light
like LED to indicate the interruptibility status to co-workers.
This light has evolved throughout the pilots1. The first model,
which was designed and soldered in-house, is shown in Figure
1a. In Figure 1b the same model light is shown encased
in plastic and deployed in an open office space. Finally, Figure
1c shows the blink(1)2 LED light that we adopted to avoid
installation issues with certain drivers immediately after the
first major pilot, which was also the first of two pilots in India
(denoted as India #1 in Figure 2). Typically, we mounted the
LED light on a user’s cubical wall or outside a user’s office.
The light uses different colors to indicate four states: Available
as green, Busy as red, Do Not Disturb (DnD) as pulsating red,
and Away as yellow. Note that these states and colors mimic
the ones used by prominent instant messaging services, in
particular the one used by the company under study Application. The application features three main components:
a Tracker to capture events relevant for calculating the interruptibility
state, a Status Analyzer to analyze the captured
events and calculate the user’s interruptibility state on the fly,
and a Status Manager to manage the user’s current status,
propagating it to the LED light and other applications, in particular
instant messaging (IM) clients. The application was
implemented to be compatible with the Windows operating
system, Skype for Business, an IM and video-conferencing
system, and Office 365, a software suite that provides email
and calendaring services, amongst others. We chose to tailor
our application to these systems and applications due to the IT
setup at the target company for our study.
The Tracker logs a user’s mouse and keyboard interaction.
In particular, it collects mouse clicks, movements as pixels
moved, scrolling as pixels scrolled and keystrokes (without
recording the specific key). This component also logs calendar
events to determine meetings and the Skype status.
The Status Analyzer uses the tracked keyboard and mouse
events to calculate the user’s interruptibility status on the fly,
i.e., whether the user is available, busy, highly busy (DnD)
or away. The algorithms used to calculate the interruptibility
status are described below.
The Status Manager is notified by the Status Analyzer at
every change in the user’s interruptibility, and then propagates
the updated status to the physical LED light and the user’s
presence status in Skype for Business. The presence status
in Skype for Business can also be changed manually by the
user, or automatically by the Office 365 calendar, in case a
meeting is scheduled. In case the presence status is changed
manually, the Status Manager updates the interruptibility state
of the application and the physical LED light.
Algorithms for Status Updates. Over the course of this study,
we used three different algorithms to determine and update the
interruptibility status automatically, improving them based on
critical user feedback as discussed below.
FlowTracker. This algorithm sums up the computer interaction
in the past three minutes according to heuristic weights
assigned to each type of event, which were tuned based on
feedback from early alpha and beta users of the FlowLight.
If the value of the sum is in between the top 9% and the top
4% of their activity range—we captured averages over the
past days—the user is considered busy. If it is within the top
4%, the user is considered highly busy. In our first pilot study
in Bangalore, India (India #1 in Figure 2), we used different
thresholds at first, namely 13% and 5% based on a prior study
that indicated that knowledge workers are not interruptible for
approximately 18% of their day. However, several technical
writers (and others) involved in that pilot gave strong feedback
that the light switched to the busy state too easily, which is
why we lowered the thresholds to the mentioned 9% and 4%.
Smoothing. While the FlowTracker showed promise, many
early users complained that it was too sensitive to certain input.
For instance, a twenty second burst of typing may cause a user
to temporarily be shown as busy. Therefore, the Smoothing
algorithm marks users as busy if they were active in each of the
last three minutes and exceeded a threshold of 100 combined
mouse clicks and key presses in the recent past (between 4
and 7 minutes ago). This algorithm reduces frequent changes
by requiring over three minutes of activity to become busy
and, once busy, by requiring only one above-threshold minute
in the recent past to remain busy. To achieve the highly busy
status, users had to be busy at the current point in time and
had to be above-threshold for fifteen of the last thirty minutes.
Smoothed FlowTracker. While the Smoothing algorithm leads
to fewer status changes, since it relied on a static threshold
(i.e., 100 combined mouse clicks and key presses), it did not
adapt to individual users’ work patterns. For instance, designers
working on drawings tended to use mouse clicks almost
exclusively, which makes it difficult to exceed the threshold.
Thus, we finally combined the FlowTracker algorithm with
the Smoothing algorithm to achieve the advantages of both
approaches. This algorithm, currently in use, operates as the
Smoothing algorithm, but instead of using a static threshold, it
utilizes the FlowTracker algorithm to determine above threshold
values. This algorithm eliminated all of the most common
complaints reported by pilot users. Further refinement of the
algorithm is left for future work.
Although our main intent was to use an algorithm to infer
interruptibility, we offered participants a “Manual Only” mode
since it was requested by some participants, especially those
with management roles that needed to be available to others
most of the time, and we noticed (and our study confirmed)
that our algorithms might not be accurate for everyone or for
all activities requiring focus, such as reading or thinking.